---
layout: post
title: "Why Toolsmithing is Important"
date: 2012-03-19 10:02
comments: true
categories: 
---

This weekend I took a few hours and read through [Brian P. Hogan][bphogan]'s
[book][pragprogtmux] on [tmux][tmux]. 

While I did get a lot out of the book, I'm not going to talk about tmux itself.
Instead, I'd like to talk a bit about toolsmithing.

It's generally understood that as software developers, we don't actually spend a
whole lot of time _writing_ code. A significant portion of the time we spend in
our code editing environments is actually spent reading and understanding code -
there's a comparatively significant amount of effort involved in getting to the
point where we can contribute anything material to the code base. On top of
that, most of us actually don't spend all day in the editor - there are
calls/chats with coworkers and bosses, support issues to look through, data the
client needs gathered, and all manner of other non-coding tasks that we get
sucked into over the course of a normal day.

Often people look at toolsmithing as a means of gaining efficiency - by becoming
more familiar with your tools overall and discovering shortcuts, you can shave
seconds off of common tasks and end up being more productive in the long run.

This is one of the attitudes conveyed in the tmux book. The reason you should
familiarize yourself with tmux is because it will make you faster and save you
the excruciating few seconds it takes to reach for your mouse. 

But if we don't spend all that much time, comparatively, using our tools... how
much does a few extra seconds actually buy us? Even if we're generous and assume
that we've saved ourselves 5 minutes over the course of the day, is 5 minutes of
extra productivity really going to do us that much good? 

(A common fallacy here is to say "Well, that adds up to 25 minutes per
work-week, or about 100 minutes a month, or about 20 hours over the course of a
year - that's like getting two and a half extra days of effort every year!". If
only the world worked like this, though. I can't take the 5 minutes I saved
today and put it into some kind of time-bank where I can redeem it later - I'll
either use it to work on something *right now* (which has to be simple if it's
going to be done in 5 minutes) or I'll waste it on leisurely pursuits, like
taking an extra little break to walk around the house.)

So why do it, then? If it doesn't provide us with huge daily wins in our
productivity, is there any point in trying to improve our tools?

Obviously I think so, or I wouldn't have wasted my Saturday doing so. To me, the
real answer is about pride (the good kind), and passion, and motivation to a
much greater extent than it is about efficiency and productivity.

A carpenter can build great things with tools from Wal-Mart. A chef can cook
delicious dishes with pots and pans from IKEA. A writer can pen a brilliant
novel using a Bic and a $0.79 college-ruled notebook. But when you look at how
the great artists in their field work, you find that they tend towards more
expensive tools. Does the soft leather cover on a writer's notebook enable them
to write faster? Does the chef's copper cookware help her prepare more dishes at
once? Does the carpenter's sleek titanium hammer help him drive more nails?

Great tools are inspirational. When we're confronted with tools that are
interesting we are inspired to work with them, whether that interest comes from
their beauty, elegance, simplicity, or specification. This inspiration helps to
yield better results from our labor.

So the next time you get a chance to mess around with a new tool or tweak your
existing workflow, I would encourage you to get in there and do it. Even if you
decide not to change anything, taking the time to appreciate the tools of your
trade will push you to become better.

[bphogan]: http://twitter.com/#!/bphogan
[pragprogtmux]: http://pragprog.com/book/bhtmux/tmux
[tmux]: http://tmux.sourceforge.net/
